[Liquibase]: documentation for the Ydb Dialect of Liquibase (#2606)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/integrations/liquibase.md

> # Support for the YDB dialect in the Liquibase migration tool. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Migrating {{ ydb-short-name }} data schemas with the Liquibase migration tool
```

## Introduction 

> In today's world of software development, database schema versioning is a critical task to ensure consistency and the ability to roll back changes. Database migration tools, such as Liquibase, provide tools for versioning, tracking, and applying changes to the schema. 

Reviewer: Given the term "consistency" is used so extensively in the context of consistency models and anomalies (like in https://jepsen.io/consistency), I'd recommend to rephrase this paragraph to avoid using it in the other meaning.

> In today's world of software development, database schema versioning is a critical task to ensure consistency and the ability to roll back changes. Database migration tools, such as Liquibase, provide tools for versioning, tracking, and applying changes to the schema. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In today's world of software development, database schema versioning is a critical task to ensure consistency and the ability to roll back changes. Database migration tools, such as [Liquibase](https://www.liquibase.com/), provide tools for versioning, tracking, and applying changes to the schema. 
```

> In today's world of software development, database schema versioning is a critical task to ensure consistency and the ability to roll back changes. Database migration tools, such as Liquibase, provide tools for versioning, tracking, and applying changes to the schema. 

Reviewer: Also, an introduction in documentation needs to be more practical. Like what you could achieve if you use this specific integration. Readers here already have some understanding about what is YDB and might have already stumbled upon migration issues.

Reviewer: the same applies for the rest of the text

> However, the emergence of new database management systems (DBMS) has made it necessary to integrate with these systems in order to support their unique capabilities and SQL dialects. 
> 
> We will discuss the results of integrating DB dialect with Liquibase in this article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
this might be ok as an introduction to a blog post, but looks irrelevant for documentation

> ## Features of the YDB Dialect 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Features of the {{ ydb-short-name }} Dialect 
```

> Liquibase's main functionality is the abstract description of database schemas in `.xml`, `.json`, and `.yaml` formats. This ensures portability when switching between different database management systems (DBMS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liquibase's main functionality is the abstract description of database schemas in `.xml`, `.json`, or `.yaml` format. This ensures portability when switching between different database management systems (DBMS).
```

> The following basic features are supported in the YDB dialect:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following basic features are supported in the {{ ydb-short-name }} dialect:
```

| `char`, `java.sql.Types.CHAR`, `bpchar`, `character`, `nchar`, `java.sql.Types.NCHAR`, `nchar2`, `text`, `varchar`, `java.sql.Types.VARCHAR`, `java.lang.String`, `varchar2`, `character varying`, `nvarchar`, `java.sql.Types.NVARCHAR`, `nvarchar2`, `national`, `clob`, `longvarchar`, `longtext`, `java.sql.Types.LONGVARCHAR`, `java.sql.Types.CLOB`, `nclob`, `longnvarchar`, `ntext`, `java.sql.Types.LONGNVARCHAR`, `java.sql.Types.NCLOB`, `tinytext`, `mediumtext`, `long varchar`, `long nvarchar` | `Text`                     |
| `timestamp`, `java.sql.Types.TIMESTAMP`, `java.sql.TIMESTAMP`                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | `Timestamp`                |

> | `java.util.Date`, `time`, `java.sql.Types.TIME`, `java.sql.Time`                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | `Datetime`                 |

Author: TzDate, TzDatetime, TzTimestamp not supported in table columns

> | `java.util.Date`, `time`, `java.sql.Types.TIME`, `java.sql.Time`                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | `Datetime`                 |

Author: I take type mapping from JDBC.

https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-jdbc-driver/blob/develop/jdbc/src/main/java/tech/ydb/jdbc/impl/YdbTypesImpl.java#L94

In YDB Java SDK Timestamp corresponds to the Instant.class [a.k.a java.sql.Timestamp].

{% note info %}

The case of the data type does not matter.

{% endnote %}

### Changing the table structure

`dropTable` - delete table. For example: `<dropTable tableName="episodes"/>`

`addColumn` - add column in table. For example:

```xml

<addColumn tableName="seasons">
    <column name="is_deleted" type="bool"/>
</addColumn>
```

`createIndex` - create index. For example:

```xml

<createIndex tableName="episodes" indexName="episodes_index" unique="false">
    <column name="title"/>
</createIndex>
```

{% note info %}

Asynchronous indexes should be created using native SQL migrations.

{% endnote %}

`dropIndex` - drop index. For example: `<dropIndex tableName="series" indexName="series_index"/>`

### Inserting data into a table

> `loadData`, `loadUpdateData` - download data from CSV file. *loadUpdate* loads data using the UPSERT command. Data will be automatically converted to the required types, taking into account the strict typing in {{ ydb-short-name }}.

Author: loadUpdate === loadUpdateData

        xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.liquibase.org/xml/ns/dbchangelog
                      http://www.liquibase.org/xml/ns/dbchangelog/dbchangelog-3.8.xsd">

    <changeSet id="episodes" author="kurdyukov-kir">
        <comment>Table episodes.</comment>

        <createTable tableName="episodes">
            <column name="series_id" type="bigint">
                <constraints primaryKey="true"/>
            </column>
            <column name="season_id" type="bigint">
                <constraints primaryKey="true"/>
            </column>
            <column name="episode_id" type="bigint">
                <constraints primaryKey="true"/>
            </column>

            <column name="title" type="text"/>
            <column name="air_date" type="timestamp"/>
        </createTable>
        <rollback>
            <dropTable tableName="episodes"/>
        </rollback>
    </changeSet>
    <changeSet id="index_episodes_title" author="kurdyukov-kir">
        <createIndex tableName="episodes" indexName="index_episodes_title" unique="false">
            <column name="title"/>
        </createIndex>
    </changeSet>
</databaseChangeLog>
```

> After executing the `liquibase update` command, Liquibase will print the following log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After executing the `liquibase update` command, Liquibase will print the following log:
```

```bash
UPDATE SUMMARY
Run:                          2
Previously run:               0
Filtered out:                 0
-------------------------------
Total change sets:            2

Liquibase: Update has been successful. Rows affected: 2
Liquibase command 'update' was executed successfully.
```

After applying migrations, the data schema now looks like this:

> ![../_assets/liquibase-step-1.png](../_assets/liquibase-step-1.png)

Reviewer: An `_assets` folder can be on any level in the documentation, and it's better to move these screenshots closer to the article to the `integrations` folder.

> You can see that Liquibase has created two service tables: `DATABASECHANGELOG`, which is the migration log, and `DATABASECHANGELOGLOCK`, which is a table for acquiring a distributed lock.
> 
> Contents of the `DATABASECHANGELOG` table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that Liquibase has created two service tables: `DATABASECHANGELOG`, which is the migration log, and `DATABASECHANGELOGLOCK`, which is a table for acquiring a distributed lock.

Example contents of the `DATABASECHANGELOG` table:
```

| AUTHOR        | COMMENTS        | CONTEXTS | DATEEXECUTED | DEPLOYMENT_ID | DESCRIPTION                                                    | EXECTYPE | FILENAME               | ID                   | LABELS | LIQUIBASE | MD5SUM                             | ORDEREXECUTED | TAG |
|:--------------|:----------------|:---------|:-------------|:--------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:---------|:-----------------------|:---------------------|:-------|:----------|:-----------------------------------|:--------------|:----|
| kurdyukov-kir | Table episodes. |          | 12:53:27     | 1544007500    | createTable tableName=episodes                                 | EXECUTED | migration/episodes.xml | episodes             |        | 4.25.1    | 9:4067056a5ab61db09b379a93625870ca | 1             |
| kurdyukov-kir | ""              |          | 12:53:28     | 1544007500    | createIndex indexName=index_episodes_title, tableName=episodes | EXECUTED | migration/episodes.xml | index_episodes_title |        | 4.25.1    | 9:49b8b0b22d18c7fd90a3d6b2c561455d | 2             |

> ### Evolution of the database schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Database schema evolution
```

Let's say we need to create a {{ydb-short-name }} topic and turn off auto partitioning of the table. This can be done with a native SQL script:

```sql
--liquibase formatted sql

> --changeset kurdyukov-kir:10

Reviewer: It's not clear if this number has any meaning. Also, why does it use your login for the name instead of something like `create-a-topic`?

Author: kurdyukov-kir is author, 10 is id

> CREATE
> TOPIC `my_topic` (

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE TOPIC `my_topic` (
```

    CONSUMER my_consumer
    ) WITH (retention_period = Interval('P1D')
);

--changeset kurdyukov-kir:auto-partitioning-disabled
ALTER TABLE episodes SET (AUTO_PARTITIONING_BY_SIZE = DISABLED);
```

> Also add a new column `is_deleted` and remove the index `index_episodes_title`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, let's add a new column `is_deleted` and remove the `index_episodes_title` index:
```

```xml

<changeSet id="alter-episodes" author="kurdyukov-kir">
    <comment>Alter table episodes.</comment>

    <dropIndex tableName="episodes" indexName="index_episodes_title"/>

    <addColumn tableName="episodes">
        <column name="is_deleted" type="bool"/>
    </addColumn>
</changeSet>
<include file="/migration/sql/yql.sql" relativeToChangelogFile="true"/>
```

> After executing `liquibase update`, the database schema will be successfully updated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After executing `liquibase update`, the database schema will be successfully updated with all of these changes:
```

```bash
UPDATE SUMMARY
Run:                          3
Previously run:               2
Filtered out:                 0
-------------------------------
Total change sets:            5

Liquibase: Update has been successful. Rows affected: 3
Liquibase command 'update' was executed successfully.
```

The result will be deleting the index, adding the `is_deleted` column, disabling the auto partitioning setting, and creating a topic:

![../_assets/liquibase-step-2.png](../_assets/liquibase-step-2.png)

### Initializing liquibase in a project with a non-empty data schema

> Suppose I have an existing project with the current database schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's suppose there's an existing project with the following database schema:
```

![../_assets/liquibase-step-3.png](../_assets/liquibase-step-3.png)

> To start using liquibase, you need to run `liquibase generate-changelog --changelog-file=changelog.xml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case? to start using Liquibase, you need to run `liquibase generate-changelog --changelog-file=changelog.xml` first.
```

> The content of the generated changelog.xml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of the generated changelog.xml:
```

        <column name="json_column" type="JSON"/>
        <column name="jsondocument_column" type="JSONDOCUMENT"/>
        <column name="date_column" type="DATE"/>
        <column name="datetime_column" type="DATETIME"/>
        <column name="timestamp_column" type="TIMESTAMP"/>
        <column name="interval_column" type="INTERVAL"/>
    </createTable>
</changeSet>
<changeSet author="kurdyukov-kir (generated)" id="1711556283305-2">
    <createTable tableName="episodes">
        <column name="series_id" type="INT64">
            <constraints nullable="false" primaryKey="true"/>
        </column>
        <column name="season_id" type="INT64">
            <constraints nullable="false" primaryKey="true"/>
        </column>
        <column name="episode_id" type="INT64">
            <constraints nullable="false" primaryKey="true"/>
        </column>
        <column name="title" type="TEXT"/>
        <column name="air_date" type="DATE"/>
    </createTable>
</changeSet>
<changeSet author="kurdyukov-kir (generated)" id="1711556283305-3">
    <createIndex indexName="title_index" tableName="episodes">
        <column name="title"/>
    </createIndex>
</changeSet>
```

> Then you need to synchronize the generated changelog.xml the file, this is done by the command `liquibase changelog-sync --changelog-file=dbchangelog.xml`.

Reviewer: It's not clear what this is supposed to do: why the filename is different? We now have two changelog files? If so, what's the difference between them?

| `Text`, `Bytes`, `Json`, `JsonDocument` | Represent as text                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| `Float`, `Double`, `Decimal(22, 9)`     | A real number                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | `Interval`                              | [Format](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/time/Duration.html#parse(java.lang.CharSequence)) `java.time.Duration`, prefix `PT` is optional                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: This `PT` thing is part of ISO8601 too, and there might be days/weeks/years between P and T, and intervals can be negative, so it's not just a prefix. So if it follows the standard it's better to refer to it instead of Java docs. Please clarify what exactly is optional. Are there any additional limitations like in YDB itself?

> | `Date`, `Datetime`, `Timestamp`         | Format [ISO-8601](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601), in Java, the following format is used: [ISO_LOCAL_DATE](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_LOCAL_DATE), [ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME), [ISO_INSTANT](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_INSTANT) |

Reviewer: it's still not clear which of these formats you're supposed to put into a CSV file to be imported + in which precision (YDB's or Java's) as they are different + what happens with timezones

> | `Date`, `Datetime`, `Timestamp`         | Format [ISO-8601](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601), in Java, the following format is used: [ISO_LOCAL_DATE](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_LOCAL_DATE), [ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME), [ISO_INSTANT](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_INSTANT) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `Date`, `Datetime`, `Timestamp`         | Format [ISO-8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601), in Java, the following format is used: [ISO_LOCAL_DATE](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_LOCAL_DATE), [ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME), [ISO_INSTANT](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html#ISO_INSTANT) |
```

{% note warning %}

To understand which SQL statements {{ydb-short-name}} can perform, read the documentation for the query language [YQL](https://ydb.tech/docs/en/yql/reference/).

{% endnote %}

{% note info %}

It is important to note that custom YQL instructions can be applied via [native SQL queries](https://docs.liquibase.com/concepts/changelogs/sql-format.html).

{% endnote %}

## How to use it? {#using}

There are two ways:

{% list tabs %}

- Programmatically from Java / Kotlin applications

  The project's [README](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-java-dialects/tree/main/liquibase-dialect) describes how to use it from Java or Kotlin in detail. There is also an [example of a Spring Boot application](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-java-examples/tree/master/jdbc/spring-liquibase-app) using it.

- Liquibase CLI

>   First, you need to install Liquibase itself using [one of the recommended methods](https://docs.liquibase.com/start/install/home.html). Then you need to place the `.jar` archives of [{{ ydb-short-name }} JDBC driver](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb-jdbc-driver/releases) and Liquibase [{{ ydb-short-name }} dialect](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/tech.ydb.dialects/liquibase-ydb-dialect/1.0.0) into the `internal/lib` folder.

Reviewer: btw isn't the official maven repo this one https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/tech/ydb/ ? and the referenced one seems to be some unofficial one

  ```bash
  # $(which liquibase)
  cd ./internal/lib/
  
  # you may need to sudo
  # set an actual versions .jar files
  curl -L -o ydb-jdbc-driver.jar https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/tech/ydb/jdbc/ydb-jdbc-driver-shaded/2.0.7/ydb-jdbc-driver-shaded-2.0.7.jar

>   curl -L -o liquibase-ydb-dialect.jar https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/tech/ydb/dialects/liquibase-ydb-dialect/1.0.0/liquibase-ydb-dialect-1.0.0.jar

Reviewer: It seems like maven.org also belongs to some commercial company instead of ASF

Author: Changed on `https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/tech/`

|:--------------|:----------------|:---------|:-------------|:--------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:---------|:-----------------------|:---------------------|:-------|:----------|:-----------------------------------|:--------------|:----|
| kurdyukov-kir | Table episodes. |          | 12:53:27     | 1544007500    | createTable tableName=episodes                                 | EXECUTED | migration/episodes.xml | episodes             |        | 4.25.1    | 9:4067056a5ab61db09b379a93625870ca | 1             |
| kurdyukov-kir | ""              |          | 12:53:28     | 1544007500    | createIndex indexName=index_episodes_title, tableName=episodes | EXECUTED | migration/episodes.xml | index_episodes_title |        | 4.25.1    | 9:49b8b0b22d18c7fd90a3d6b2c561455d | 2             |

### Database schema evolution

Let's say we need to create a {{ydb-short-name }} topic and turn off the param `AUTO_PARTITIONING_BY_SIZE` of the table. This can be done with a native SQL script:

```sql
--liquibase formatted sql

> --changeset kurdyukov-kir:create-a-topic

Reviewer: why your login is used here?

Author: ${author}:${id}

        <column name="interval_column" type="INTERVAL"/>
    </createTable>
</changeSet>
<changeSet author="kurdyukov-kir (generated)" id="1711556283305-2">
    <createTable tableName="episodes">
        <column name="series_id" type="INT64">
            <constraints nullable="false" primaryKey="true"/>
        </column>
        <column name="season_id" type="INT64">
            <constraints nullable="false" primaryKey="true"/>
        </column>
        <column name="episode_id" type="INT64">
            <constraints nullable="false" primaryKey="true"/>
        </column>
        <column name="title" type="TEXT"/>
        <column name="air_date" type="DATE"/>
    </createTable>
</changeSet>
<changeSet author="kurdyukov-kir (generated)" id="1711556283305-3">
    <createIndex indexName="title_index" tableName="episodes">
        <column name="title"/>
    </createIndex>
</changeSet>
```

Then you need to synchronize the generated changelog.xml the file, this is done by the command:

```bash
liquibase changelog-sync --changelog-file=changelog.xml 
```

The result will be liquibase synchronization in your project:

![_assets/liquibase-step-4.png](_assets/liquibase-step-4.png)

> ## Connecting to YDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Connecting to {{ ydb-short-name }}
```
